---
title: "Pakyow 0.9: Release Notes, Upgrade Guide, and v1.0 Roadmap"
time: 7:45am CST
---

I am happy to announce that Pakyow v0.9 is available for use! Aside from the normal bug fixes and performance improvements, here's a run-down on what you'll see.

## Faster View Rendering

We've abstracted the underlying dom manipulation code into an object called a doc. This gave us the opportunity to write a doc that doesn't rely on Nokogiri for rendering. The new doc, called StringDoc, renders many times faster and will bring a noticeable performance boost to an app of any significant size. It's also a drop-in replacement, meaning no code changes are required.

StringDoc is the default for v0.9, but you can use the old NokogiriDoc by setting the new `Pakyow::Config.presenter.view_doc_class` config option appropriately.

## Rake Tasks

Generated apps include a new `pakyow-rake` along with a simplified [Rakefile](https://github.com/metabahn/pakyow/blob/master/lib/generators/pakyow/app/templates/Rakefile). It includes the following tasks, with more to come in the future:

    console:
    rake --tasks
    rake pakyow:bindings[view_path]  # List bindings across all views, or a specific view path
    rake pakyow:prepare              # Prepare the app by configuring and loading code
    rake pakyow:routes               # List all routes (method, path, group[name])
    rake pakyow:stage                # Stage the app by preparing and loading routes / views

## Better App Generation

Thanks to [Kori Roys](https://github.com/koriroys) app generation is much improved by showing output as it happens.

## Empty Options

When defining select options, you can specify that the first option be empty:

    ruby:
    options :foo, empty: true do
      ...
    end

## Auto-Config

A Pakyow app will be auto-configured for development, staging, and production environments. Any config options you override in the appropriate `configure` block have precedence, but this guarantees that your app will be running with sane defaults out of the box.

## Ruby Support

To make use of as much shiny goodness as possible, we've dropped support for Ruby versions < 2.0. 

In addition, Rubinius and JRuby will likely be unsupported until v1.0. The reason for this is that developing features for more versions takes more time. We'd rather focus on efforts around MRI, knowing that we'll need to make a few tweaks for things to function properly in non-MRI distributions.

## Upgrade Guide

There are several Pakyow apps out in the wild, so we feel it's important to start including an upgrade guide along with new releases. Here's the one for v0.9.

## Update Gemfile

Update `pakyow` in your `Gemfile` to point at v0.9:

    ruby:
    gem 'pakyow', '0.9.0'

## Rakefile

Replace these lines from a v0.8 generated app:

    ruby:
    require File.expand_path('../app', __FILE__)
    Pakyow::App.stage(ENV['ENV'])

With this:

    ruby:
    require 'pakyow-rake'

Any custom tasks that depend on the app being staged should add the `pakyow:prepare` or `pakyow:stage` tasks as dependent tasks appropriately.

## Restful Route Updates

Rename any reference to `delete` in restful route definitions to `remove`.

## Binding Context

The app context is no longer automatically available in bindings. Instead, pass the context when binding via the `ctx` keyword argument. For the app context to be available, just pass `self`:

    ruby:
    bind(some_data, ctx: self)

The context is available in the binding as `context`.

## Binding Yield

The value is yielded first to bindings, then the full bindable:

    ruby:
    binding :foo do |value, bindable|
      ...
    end

## Attrs

The `attributes` method on `View` and `ViewCollection` has been removed. Update your code to use `attrs` (this should be a simple find and replace).

## Next Steps

This is a big step towards our goal of a 1.0 release. Since 0.8, we've changed course a bit on what features we want in place before we slap on the "1.0" label. Below is a high-level view of the current 1.0 roadmap.

## v0.10

This release will focus on addressing stability and security concerns. It will also introduce a few new features that we've been working on, including:

**Testing Library**  
Several test helpers have been written that will make testing Pakyow apps a whole lot easier. This even includes the ability to test views, which is very difficult to do using other frameworks (we plan to discuss this in a separate post).

**Resource Handling**  
Pakyow currently has no built-in way for dealing with images, CSS, JS, and other resources. This will be added in a very Pakyow-like way for this release.

**Localization**  
Full support for i18n localization in `core`, `presenter`, and `mailer`.

**View Versioning**  
The ability for different versions of a view to be defined by the designer, while providing a method for the back-end to choose which version to display based on some business rule.

**View Formatters**  
Formatters allow for data to be formatted as it's bound to a view. This is possible now via bindings, but it isn't possible for the view to specify how the data should be formatted.

**Binding Parts**  
This will make it possible to define bindings in parts (e.g. href, content) and use only some of the defined parts in a particular binding call. It will be up to the view to decide which part(s) to use. This eliminates the need to, for instance, define a `show_link` binding that binds the `href` and `content` for a link, and `show_href` which only binds the `href`.

**Publishing Tools**  
We'll be releasing a new library, `pakyow-publish`, around the 0.10 release. Let's face it, building static sites could be a lot easier. This library will make it possible to generate a static version of Pakyow app and easily publish it to an SFTP server or S3 instance. This library has existed in one form or another for some time now. We've used it to build blogs, documentation, and bigger websites where the views are dynamically generated, but very infrequently.

## v0.11

This release is planned to be the final release before v1.0. It will introduce several new libraries to handle updating views on the client and better prototyping tools.

## v1.0

Assuming it all goes according to plan, this release will be (relatively) minor in comparison and is expected to include tools for interacting with your app during development and after release. 

This release will also reintroduce support for Rubinious and JRuby.

## Closing Thoughts

We hope you enjoy the new release. As always, feel free to join the conversation here, on the [mailing list](http://groups.google.com/group/pakyow), or find us on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/pakyow). We'd love to hear from you.

[bryanp](http://twitter.com/bryanp)
