---
title: "Pakyow v0.9: Release Notes + Upgrade Guide"
time: 11:40am CST
---

I am happy to announce that Pakyow v0.9 is available for use today! 

## Major Updates

Here's a run-down of the major changes that you'll see.

### Faster Views

We've abstracted the underlying DOM manipulation logic out of the View into Doc
objects. This led us to design a Doc that doesn't rely on
[Nokogiri](https://github.com/sparklemotion/nokogiri) for view manipulation. We
call it StringDoc, and it's fast
([benchmark](https://gist.github.com/bryanp/75c8e82f7d2a15d0783f)). You'll
notice a significant performance improvement in your apps.

StringDoc is the default for v0.9. This means your app will use it out of the
box. If for some reason you would rather use NokogiriDoc, just set the new
`presenter.view_doc_class` config option appropriately (keeping in mind there
are very few reasons you'd want or need to do this).

### Auto-Config

Pakyow apps will now be auto-configured for development, staging, and production
environments. This feature guarantees that your app will be running with sane
defaults out of the box.

### Rake Tasks

We've released a new `pakyow-rake` library that adds several useful rake tasks to your app:

```
rake --tasks
rake pakyow:bindings[view_path]  # List bindings across all views, or a specific view path
rake pakyow:prepare              # Prepare the app by configuring and loading code
rake pakyow:routes               # List all routes (method, path, group[name])
rake pakyow:stage                # Stage the app by preparing and loading routes / views
```

Along with this is a simplified [Rakefile](https://github.com/metabahn/pakyow/blob/master/lib/generators/pakyow/app/templates/Rakefile) that's included with all generated apps.

### Empty Options

When defining select options, you can now specify that the first option be empty:

```ruby
options :foo, empty: true do
  ...
end
```

### Config Changes

The default log file has been renamed to `pakyow.log` and moved to the `log` directory.

## Upgrade Guide

Since there are several Pakyow apps out in the wild, it's important to begin
including upgrade guides with new releases. Here's the guide for the v0.9
release.

### 1. Gemfile

Update `pakyow` in your `Gemfile` to point at v0.9:

```ruby
gem 'pakyow', '0.9.0'
```

In terminal (from your app directory), run `bundle install`.

### 2. Rakefile

Open up your `Rakefile` and find these lines at the top of the file:

```ruby
require File.expand_path('../app', __FILE__)
Pakyow::App.stage(ENV['ENV'])
```

Replace them with this single line:

```ruby
require 'pakyow-rake'
```

Note that your app will no longer automatically be staged. This means that if
any custom tasks depend on the app code or environment being loaded, you'll need
to make a few more changes.

For tasks that need access to dependencies or the code (e.g. a model), add
`pakyow:prepare` as a dependent task. For tasks that need to access the entire
app environment (e.g. views or routes), add `pakyow:stage` as a dependent task.

### 3. Restful Route Updates

In your restful route definitions, rename any reference to `delete` to `remove`.

### 4. Binding Arguments

The argument order to bindings is flipped from v0.8. Your bindings don't have to
accept arguments, but if they do note that the value is yielded first, then the
bindable:

```ruby
binding :foo do |value, bindable|
  ...
end
```

### 5. Attrs

The `attributes` method on `View` and `ViewCollection` has been removed. Update
your code to use the new `attrs` method instead (this should be a simple find
and replace).

## Shout Outs

Thank you:

To [Kori Roys](https://github.com/koriroys) for his improvement to app
generation. Kori also contributed a significant amount of code to the backend of
[docs](/docs), making the code a lot easier to work with.

To the entire [Metabahn](http://metabahn.com) team for their support writing and
reviewing code, testing features, and updating content and documentation.

To all of our users for providing feedback, reporting bugs, and using Pakyow to
build the web.

## Closing Thoughts

We encourage you to post your questions to [Stack
Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/pakyow). And as always, feel
free to join the conversation here, on the [mailing
list](http://groups.google.com/group/pakyow), or on
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/pakyow). We'd love to hear from you.

Enjoy the new release!

[bryanp](http://twitter.com/bryanp)
