---
title: "Pakyow 0.10 Release Announcement"
time: 9:45am CST
---

Three weeks ago, Pakyow 0.10 was quietly pushed out to RubyGems. Since then, the
team has been working on writing [Docs](https://pakyow.org/docs) and creating a
new [Warmup Tutorial](https://pakyow.org/docs/warmup). Today (which happens to
overlap with RubyConf 2015), I'd like to make the official announcement.

The 0.10 release is the most complete release to date. 0.10 introduces a brand
new approach to building modern websites and web apps. Support for WebSockets
and Channels now ships with every Pakyow project via the new Pakyow Realtime
library.

Pakyow UI, building on Pakyow Realtime, introduces auto-updating, reactive views
to Pakyow. With Pakyow UI, users of your website of web app will always see the
latest version of the view without the need to refresh their browser.

Let's dive into this and some of the other new features you'll find in 0.10.

## Pakyow UI: Auto-Updating Views

Pakyow UI is the 0.10 feature that we're most excited about. Currently, building
views that react to state changes require moving some (if not all)  business
logic to the client. Managing state on both the client and server is a
challenge, so many people choose the single-page app model.

Single-Page apps introduce their own complexity and pitfalls. They're also poor
fit for content-focused websites and web apps. From the beginning of this
project we've seen the potential to offer a unique solution that falls between a
single-page app and something like Rails.

Pakyow UI is different from current approaches (Ember, Meteor, etc) because it
provides realtime, reactive views in a backend-driven architecture; no code is
moved to the client. A page is fully rendered in the initial request, avoiding
many of the challenges inherent with single-page apps. Once rendered, subsequent
updates are applied to the view by a JavaScript library, called Ring.

With Pakyow UI, you get reactive views essentially for free. The initial
rendering logic is enough for Pakyow to understand how to react to future
changes in state. This results in less code and also greatly reduces code
complexity. And you won't have to write a single line of JavaScript :-)

The best way to jump into Pakyow UI is through the [Warmup
Tutorial](https://pakyow.org/docs/warmup).

[Read the Pakyow UI Docs](https://pakyow.org/docs/live-views)

## Pakyow Realtime: WebSockets + Channels

As of 0.10, Pakyow has built-in support for WebSockets and Channels. No external
process is needed -- the app server hijacks requests and establishes sockets
within the same thread. Redis Pub/Sub is used in production to scale beyond a
single app instance.

Before I go too far, I must give a shoutout to [Jerry
D'Antonio](https://twitter.com/jerrydantonio) and the team behind
[concurrent-ruby](https://github.com/ruby-concurrency/concurrent-ruby). Pakyow
Realtime relies heavily on concurrent-ruby to manage WebSocket connections, and
you and your team's work helped to make this possible; thank you!

Realtime Channels work a bit like channels in
[Phoenix](http://www.phoenixframework.org/docs/channels). Clients are subscribed
to a channel on the back-end. When the socket for that client is established,
any messages sent through the channel are also sent through the WebSocket.
Unlike Phoenix, channels are unidirectional (server to client).

Sending messages to the server happens through the application's HTTP API.
Realtime makes the API available to the WebSocket so it can be used just like
over HTTP. API requests made over a WebSocket will still receive a response,
only responses are received asynchronously.

[Read the Pakyow Realtime Docs](https://pakyow.org/docs/realtime)

## Ring: Pakyow on the Client

A key piece of Pakyow UI is [Ring](https://github.com/pakyow/ring), the client
library that brings Pakyow's view transformation API to the client side. Ring
interprets and applies transformations pushed down from the backend, updating
locally rendered views to match the latest state.

Ring can also be used to build client-side components for more advanced UIs.
These UIs can easily communicate with the back-end by calling routes over an
open WebSocket. Additionally, the back-end can push messages to a JavaScript
component rendered in a web browser.

[Browse the Ring Source Code](https://github.com/pakyow/ring)

## Test Helpers

0.10 ships with [test
helpers](https://github.com/pakyow/pakyow/tree/master/pakyow-test) that make it
easy to test aspects of a Pakyow project -- from routing to realtime channels.
It's even possible to write tests for the presentation layer. This library grew
out of various helpers written for many different projects. We're excited to
finally introduce official patterns!

[Read the Testing Docs](https://pakyow.org/docs/testing).

## 1.0 Roadmap

The largest core features are now in place for 1.0. At this point, the only
missing core features are asset handling and localization, which we are actively
working on. There are a few other minor "polish" features planned for 1.0, most
of which are [documented on
Github](https://github.com/pakyow/pakyow/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A1.0).

Really though, 1.0 is about more than features. Our goal is for Pakyow 1.0 to be
the easiest way for anyone to build for the web. The fact that Pakyow is
implemented in Ruby works to our advantage here (and was a very intentional
decision early on in the project).

We've already seen developers go from relatively little experience to launching
production apps in a matter of weeks. However, we can do better. Most of the
work on 1.0 will focus on cleaning up the codebase, test suites, and docs so
that Pakyow is more approachable all around.

In addition to docs, we'll be providing more example code and screencasts. This
information is greatly needed, and now the framework is stable enough to invest
the time into it.

## Conclusion

If you've made it this far, thank you for taking the time to read this
announcement. We're very excited about this release and hope you'll give Pakyow
a closer look. If you have questions, feedback, or concerns, please, share them
with us.

Come hang out on our [Gitter](https://gitter.im/pakyow/chat) channel. You should
also join the [forums](http://forums.pakyow.org/), and share your thoughts about
this post. Don't forget to lend a hand â€“ [ask and answer questions on Stack
Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/pakyow).

And one more thank you to everyone involved in this release, from writing code,
reviewing docs, or just sharing a few minutes of your time: Bret Young, Chad
Taylor, Chris Hansen, Chris Polk, Craig Kersteins, Dan McGuire, Lydia Lowther,
Ryan Clardy, and Wayne Schroer.

-[bryanp](https://twitter.com/bryanp/)
